ltnews38 for the next release (#1152)
latex3/latex2e: base/doc/ltnews38.tex

Just recently we added support for automatic tagging of tabular
structures including environments from \pkg{tabularx} and
\pkg{longtable}. The code is still in its early stages and lacks
configuration possibilities\Dash these will be added in the future.

\subsection{Approaching an important milestone}

Nevertheless, with this new addition we are more or less able to
automatically tag any document that confines itself to the commands
and environments described in Leslie Lamport's \emph{\LaTeX{}
Manual}~\cite{38:Lamport} by simply adding a single configuration line at the
top.

In addition, a number of extension packages that go beyond Lamport are
already supported, most importantly perhaps \pkg{amsmath} (providing
extended math capabilities) and \pkg{hyperref} (enhancing \LaTeX{} with
interactive hyperlinking features). Also already supported are some of the
major bibliography support packages such as \pkg{natbib} and
\pkg{biblatex}.

For now activation is done through the line
\begin{verbatim}
\DocumentMetadata
   {testphase={phase-III,math,tabular}}
\end{verbatim}
The math and the tabular support are not yet incorporated into

> \texttt{phase-III} but needs their own activation, so that we can

Reviewer: need

better experiment with additions and code adjustments.

The \texttt{latex-lab} bundle contains various 
(still untagged) documentation files about the new code that can
be accessed with \verb|texdoc -l latex-lab|.

\subsection{A GitHub repository dedicated to the project}

We have also started a new GitHub repository mainly intended for
reporting issues, and offering a platform for discussions. For
example, there is one discussion on ways to extend the \LaTeX{} \texttt{tabular}
syntax to allow describing the logical structure of tables (e.g.,
which cells are header cells, etc.).

Having all issues and discussions related to the project in a single
place instead of being spread across multiple repositories such as
\texttt{latex2e}, \texttt{latex3}, \texttt{tagpdf}, \texttt{hyperref},
\texttt{pdfresources}, etc., help people to find information easily
and report any issue related to the project without needing to knowing in which
code repository the problematic code resides.

You find this repository at
\url{https://github.com/latex3/tagging-project} and the mentioned
discussion on tabular syntax at
\url{https://github.com/latex3/tagging-project/discussions/1}.

> Your feedback is imported and reporting what doesn't yet work is

Reviewer: important

Author: :-)

beneficial to all users, so we hope to see you there and thank you for
any contribution, whether it is an issue or a post on a discussion
thread.

\section{Hooks, sockets and plugs}

In previous releases of \LaTeX{} we introduced the general concept of

> hooks (both specific and generic ones). These that are places in the

Reviewer: These are places

differences in package loading order. See \LaTeX{} News issues
32--34~\cite{38:ltnews} for more information.

However, sometimes you need a kind of \enquote{hook} into which only a
single chunk of code is placed at any time.\footnote{While this is in
theory possible to model with the existing hook mechanism, it is
inefficient and cumbersome.}  For example, there is code that
implements footnote placement in relation to bottom floats (above or
below them). But at any time in the document only one such placement
code can be in force. Or consider the extra code needed for making
\LaTeX{} documents accessible (e.g., adding tags to the PDF
output). Such code is either there (perhaps in alternative versions)
or not at all, but it can not have code from other packages added at
the same point interfering with the algorithm.

For these use cases we now introduce the concept of sockets and plugs.
A socket is is a place in the code into which one can put a plug (a
chunk of code with a name) after which the socket is in use and to put
a different plug in, the former one has to be taken out
first.\footnote{Think of electric outlets and plugging something into

> them} A socket may or may not have inputs that can then be used by

Author: ah, that's where I lost the period (I had moved a footnote and moved the period with it)

the plugs.
%
While this is technically not much different to putting a command in
the code and at some point alter its definition, the advantage is that
this offers a consistent interface, allows for status information,
supports tracing, etc.

You declare a new socket and possibly some plugs for it with
\begin{flushleft}
  \cs{NewSocket}\Arg{socket name}\Arg{\# of inputs} \\

>   \cs{NewSocketPug}\Arg{socket name}\Arg{plug name}\Arg{code}

Reviewer 2: Better:

. . . it’s definition, it has some important advantages such as these:
offering a consistent interface; allowing the inclusion of status information,
support for tracing.

>   \cs{NewSocketPug}\Arg{socket name}\Arg{plug name}\Arg{code}

Reviewer 2: Actually not better!  So I have Corrected the version on github.

\NewProperty{chapter}{now}{?}{\thechapter}
\end{verbatim}
The second argument means that the property is recorded immediately 
(\enquote{now}) and not at \cs{shipout}. The third argument sets a default if a 
label is unknown. It is then possible to record a list of properties with 
\cs{RecordProperties}: 
\begin{verbatim}
\RecordProperties{mylabel}
                 {chapter,page,currentlabel}
\end{verbatim}
To reference the value the \cs{RefProperty} command is provided which takes 
two arguments, the label and the property: 
\begin{verbatim}
\RefProperty{mylabel}{chapter}
\end{verbatim}
 
The new module predeclares a set of generally useful properties:
\texttt{label} (the standard counter representation), \texttt{page}
(the page representation), \texttt{title} (the title if set e.g.~by
\pkg{nameref}), \texttt{target} (the name of the link target if set,
e.g., by \pkg{hyperref}), \texttt{pagetarget} (the name of target
added each page by \pkg{hyperref}), \texttt{pagenum} (the page as an
arabic number), \texttt{abspage} (the absolute page number),
\texttt{counter} (the name of the current counter), \texttt{xpos} and
\texttt{ypos} the position on the page as set by a previous

> \cs{pdfsavepos}.

Reviewer 2: “a previous” should probably be “the most recent (within the current shipout)”

> \cs{pdfsavepos}.

Reviewer 3: Done

> \cs{pdfsavepos}.

Reviewer 4: The effect of `\pdfsavepos` won't be reset during page shipout, hence the words "within the current shipout" (already added by commit 0eddf63d (Minor adjustment from Chris, 2023-10-26)) seem wrong.

Or maybe use "within the current compilation"?

```tex
% run with pdflatex-dev
\documentclass{article}
\begin{document}
first page
\ExplSyntaxOn
\tex_savepos:D
\newpage

last~ pos:~ \the\tex_lastxpos:D,~ \the\tex_lastypos:D
% typesets "last pos: 12664326, 46515936"
\ExplSyntaxOff
\end{document}
```

A lt-propertiles example
```tex
% run with pdflatex-dev
\documentclass{article}
\begin{document}
first page
\UseName{tex_savepos:D}

mypos is
at position (\RefProperty{mypos}{xpos} sp, \RefProperty{mypos}{ypos} sp)
on page~\RefProperty{mypos}{page}
% typesets "mypos is at position (12664326 sp, 46515936 sp) on page 2"
\newpage

second page
\RecordProperties{mypos}{xpos, ypos, page}
\end{document}
```

> \cs{pdfsavepos}.

Reviewer 2: It seems that I had misinterpreted what the PDFTeX manual said about its relationship to shipout. 

This example shows two things:
that the wording needs to be changed;
that such usage (not using or recording the saved information immediately) can easily result in the information being incorrect. 

Extra note: 
this engine-level behaviour (of savepos not being reset for each shipout) is perhaps questionable, and needs further investigation;
maybe this behaviour needs some mitigation at the LaTeX to avoid the recorded information being incomplete or misleading?

> \cs{pdfsavepos}.

Author: I think it also means that LaTeX should explicitly reset thexpos/ypos property after shipout to 0/0

  
The module provides both \LaTeXe{} camel case commands and \LaTeX{} programming layer commands.    

For documentation see \texttt{texdoc ltproperties-doc}. 

\section{New or improved commands}

\subsection{Testing for the \LaTeX{} programming layer version: \cs{IfExplAtLeastTF}}

The integration of \pkg{expl3} into the kernel (the \LaTeX{}
programming layer) means that programmers can use all of the features
available without needing to load explicitly. However, as \pkg{expl3}
is not a separate package, the version can't be tested using
\cs{IfPackageAtLeastTF}. To date, low-level methods have therefore
been needed to check for the availability of features in
\pkg{expl3}. We have now added \cs{IfExplAtLeastTF} as a test working

> in the same way as \cs{IfPackageAtLeastTF} but focussed on the

Reviewer 2: Interesting one! I had not known about this. Either can be correct!

two arguments, the label and the property: 
\begin{verbatim}
\RefProperty{mylabel}{chapter}
\end{verbatim}
 
The new module predeclares a set of generally useful properties:
\texttt{label} (the standard counter representation), \texttt{page}
(the page representation), \texttt{title} (the title if set e.g.~by
\pkg{nameref}), \texttt{target} (the name of the link target if set,
e.g., by \pkg{hyperref}), \texttt{pagetarget} (the name of target
added each page by \pkg{hyperref}), \texttt{pagenum} (the page as an
arabic number), \texttt{abspage} (the absolute page number),
\texttt{counter} (the name of the current counter), and \texttt{xpos}
and \texttt{ypos} (the position on the page as set by a previous
\cs{pdfsavepos}).
  
The module provides both \LaTeXe{} camel case commands and
\LaTeX3 programming layer commands.    

For documentation see \texttt{texdoc ltproperties-doc}. 

\section{New or improved commands}

\subsection{Testing for the \LaTeX3 programming layer version: \cs{IfExplAtLeastTF}}

The integration of \pkg{expl3} (the \LaTeX3 programming layer)
into the kernel means that programmers can use all of the features

> available without needing to load it explicitly. However, as \pkg{expl3}
> is not a separate package, the version can't be tested using
> \cs{IfPackageAtLeastTF}. To date, low-level methods have therefore
> been needed to check for the availability of features in
> \pkg{expl3}. We have now added \cs{IfExplAtLeastTF} as a test working

Reviewer 4: I'd like to also mention that `expl3` is upgraded separately from LaTeX2e hence has its own version.

```suggestion
available without needing to load it explicitly. However, as \pkg{expl3}
is upgraded separately from \LaTeXe{} and it's not a separate package, its
version is different from that of \LaTeXe{} and can't be tested using
\cs{IfPackageAtLeastTF}. To date, low-level methods have therefore
been needed to check for the availability of features in
\pkg{expl3}. We have now added \cs{IfExplAtLeastTF} as a test working
```

Reviewer 3: Done modulo some formality

Reviewer 4: Just for the record, done in commit 84aeff78 (Improvement from Yukai Chou, 2023-10-26).

\cs{fpeval}. For example, this could be used to create a new function
\texttt{dinner}:
\begin{verbatim}
\ExplSyntaxOn
\fp_new_variable:n{duck}
\fp_new_function:n{dinner}
\fp_set_function:nnn{dinner}{duck}

>                     {duck - 0.25 * duck}

Reviewer: I think this should be duck - 0.25 if 1/4 duck each or no `*` if multiplication intended  as multiplication is implicit

Author: what would I know about ducks :-) this is not my example, @josephwright ?

Reviewer 3: Nope, @u-fischer

Reviewer 5: As receipe for the dinner it should probably be simply `duck - 0.25` to that everyone get the same amount.

Reviewer 6: oh no :duck:

Reviewer 2: Yummy, either way!

 >\fp_eval:n{dinner(duck)}
$
\ExplSyntaxOff
\end{verbatim}

The computation above would then generate
\begin{quote}
\ExplSyntaxOn
\fp_new_variable:n{duck}
\fp_new_function:n{dinner}
\fp_set_function:nnn{dinner}{duck}
                    {duck - 0.25 * duck}

> \fp_set_variable:nn{duck}{1}

Reviewer: as above

Author: again not my call, but it isn't impossible to always take a quarter from what remains (okay you get more hungry over time but ...)

Reviewer 2: But is a “duck” just an (fp) number theses days!!  So sad.

$\fp_eval:n{duck}
 >\fp_eval:n{dinner(duck)}
  \fp_set_variable:nn{duck}{dinner(duck)}
 >\fp_eval:n{dinner(duck)}
  \fp_set_variable:nn{duck}{dinner(duck)}
 >\fp_eval:n{dinner(duck)}
  \fp_set_variable:nn{duck}{dinner(duck)}
 >\fp_eval:n{dinner(duck)}
$
\ExplSyntaxOff
\end{quote}

Users will be able to access added functions without needing to use the
\pkg{expl3} layer. It is possible that a future release of \LaTeX{} will
add the ability to create and set floating point variables to the
document level: this will be examined based on feedback on the
utility of the programming layer change.

\section{\emph{Removed} commands}

It is very rare that commands are removed from the \LaTeX{} kernel. However, in
this release we have elected to remove \cs{GetDocumentCommandArgSpec},
\cs{GetDocumentEnvironmentArgSpec}, \cs{ShowDocumentCommandArgSpec} and
\cs{ShowDocumentEnvironmentArgSpec} from the kernel. These commands have been
moved back to the \enquote{stub} \pkg{xparse} provided in \pkg{l3packages}. The
reason for this change is that the commands were essentially part of debugging
early forms of the kernel code, and expose implementation detail in a way that

> was not helpful.

Author: I don't think so. I guess @josephwright meant to write:  and exposed implementation details in a way that ...

> was not helpful.

Reviewer 3: I'll go with `exposed`

> was not helpful.

Reviewer 2: Not so simple: see @muzimuzhi superior resolution (later).

$
\ExplSyntaxOff
\end{verbatim}

The computation above would then generate
\begin{quote}
\ExplSyntaxOn
\fp_new_variable:n{duck}
\fp_new_function:n{dinner}
\fp_set_function:nnn{dinner}{duck}
                    {duck - 0.25 * duck}
\fp_set_variable:nn{duck}{1}
$\fp_eval:n{duck}
 >\fp_eval:n{dinner(duck)}
  \fp_set_variable:nn{duck}{dinner(duck)}
 >\fp_eval:n{dinner(duck)}
  \fp_set_variable:nn{duck}{dinner(duck)}
 >\fp_eval:n{dinner(duck)}
  \fp_set_variable:nn{duck}{dinner(duck)}
 >\fp_eval:n{dinner(duck)}
$
\ExplSyntaxOff
\end{quote}

Users will be able to access added functions without needing to use the
\pkg{expl3} layer. It is possible that a future release of \LaTeX{} will
add the ability to create and set floating point variables to the
document level: this will be examined based on feedback on the
utility of the programming layer change.

\section{\emph{Removed} commands}

It is very rare that commands are removed from the \LaTeX{} kernel. However, in
this release we have elected to remove \cs{GetDocumentCommandArgSpec},
\cs{GetDocumentEnvironmentArgSpec}, \cs{ShowDocumentCommandArgSpec} and
\cs{ShowDocumentEnvironmentArgSpec} from the kernel. These commands have been

> moved back to the \enquote{stub} \pkg{xparse} provided in \pkg{l3packages}. The
> reason for this change is that the commands were essentially part of debugging
> early forms of the kernel code, and exposed implementation details in a way that
> was not helpful.

Reviewer 4: If what that "and" conjuncts are
- "the commands were essentially part of debugging early forms of the kernel code" and
- "exposed implementation details in a way that was not helpful",

then maybe

```suggestion
moved back to the \enquote{stub} \pkg{xparse} provided in \pkg{l3packages}. The
reasons for this change are that the commands were essentially part of debugging
early forms of the kernel code, and exposing implementation details in a way
like that was not helpful.
```

Author: I think all it need is taking the comma out, but I leave this to @josephwright

Reviewer 4: Need to know the original intent.

Reviewer 3: I feel the comma is right: one for Barbara as a proper copy-editor

Reviewer 2: The version with the two blobs is far clearer. 
Why not go with this?

Reviewer 2: @josephwright No copy-editor, however proper, can edit text that is so ambiguous.  
Maybe a clairvoyant copy-editor is needed?

Reviewer 4: Just for the record, this is further resolved/improved in commit 6ec65ac0 (Re-write a paragraph, 2023-10-26).
